Wizard updates (improved drop downs, adding OS image step, general organization) (#413)
openshift/openshift-origin-design: designs/virtualization/4.x/create-vm-dropdowns/create-vm-dropdowns.md

---
parent: Virtualization
version: 4.x
---

# create VM dropdowns

This item will cover various updates to the VM creation wizard
- Adding descriptions to the dropdown fields (using this pattern https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-design-kit/issues/218)
- Renaming fields
- Reordering fields

![Create VM - General-default](img/1-0.jpg)
Landing on the General step, Default mode.
Section titles added, and fields reorgenized and renamed.
'General' section:
- 'Name'
- 'Description'
'Resources & configuration' section'
- 'Operating system'

> - 'VM configuration' (previously Workload profile)

Author: The "configuration" works better I guess.
But is it really better than "Workload profile/type"?
I'll ask around

> - 'VM configuration' (previously Workload profile)

Reviewer: I like Workload Type actually - it's more descriptive.

> - 'VM configuration' (previously Workload profile)

Author: Changing to 'Workload Type'

- 'Flavor (CPU and Memory)' (previously only 'flavor')
'Operating system image source' section
- 'Boot operating system via' (previously 'source')

## General step

![Create VM - General](img/1-1.jpg)
On selecting an Operating system, the VM configuration and Flavor (CPU and Memory) fields will be enabled and selected on default

> ![Create VM - General - VM configuration](img/1-1-1.jpg)

Reviewer: I'm still seeing the pink text - did you resolve this comment on purpose?

VM Configuration options
Server is the default

![Create VM - General - flavor](img/1-1-2.jpg)
Flavor options
Medium is the default

![Create VM - General](img/1-2-1.jpg)
'Boot operating system via' field options

![Create VM - General](img/1-2.jpg)
Selecting an option form the 'Boot operating system via' field will expose below all the fields required to connect the VM to an OS image source.
For example: on selecting the 'Existing PVC' option, additional fields will appear below, required to select a PVC available on the cluster.
The disk name should be added here as well to establish a better link between this step and the Storage step.
An infobox will notify the user that a disk will be added to to the disks list on the Storage step.

![Create VM - OS disk on list](img/1-3.jpg)
Within the storage step, the disk added on the general step will appear as the first item on the list.
This disk cannot be deleted but can be modified.

> ![Create VM - OS disk modal](img/1-3-1.jpg)

Author: I've changed the warning to "You can modify this disk. However, modifying this disk might affect the booting process".

Now that I think of it if we place"Disks are backed by PVCs which can be seen in storage > persistent volume claims" for all Add disk modal, it means that is true for all disks.
So how about we stop surfacing General step>OS field>Container option as a Disk from the storage step?
We might miss advanced options, but this option is not really a "Disk" (well, at least not what we decided a disk is)

> ![Create VM - OS disk modal](img/1-3-1.jpg)

Reviewer: I think we'd want some technical insight on that one, but ya if it doesn't show as a disk here then I'd be ok with that.

> ![Create VM - OS disk modal](img/1-3-1.jpg)

Author: @suomiy Yes, we plan to add 'Boot order on the advanced step, and surface that at the review step as well. :)

> ![Create VM - OS disk modal](img/1-3-1.jpg)

Reviewer 2: +1

> ![Create VM - OS disk modal](img/1-3-1.jpg)

Author: I will leave the boot order to future PR. This is a new thing and not fixing existing things.
Good convo!

Editing that disk will display a warning notification within the edit modal.

## Netwroking step

![Create VM - Networking -list](img/2-0.jpg)
NIC list.
In case no PXE boot the OS image selected on the General step, a default NIC will be added.
This NIC  exposes the VM to the cluster.

![Create VM - Networking -Default](img/2-1.jpg)

> On editing this default NIC, a warning message will remind the user that modifying this NIC might break that 'expoing to cluster' configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On editing this default NIC, an info alert will remind the user that modifying this NIC might break that 'exposing to cluster' configuration.
```

![Create VM - Networking -Add](img/2-2.jpg)
Add NIC modal.
The Advanced drawer is closed by default, as seen in the previous image.

> All fields had moved into the advanced drawer, except the Name and Network fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All fields have moved into the advanced drawer, except the Name and Network fields.
```

Reviewer: should these advanced option be marked with (default) or (recommended) ?

Author: Adding "ViritIO (recommended)"
So far there is no recommendation for the Binding method, I'm working on it with Kubevirt to simplify the help text to be more "human-oriented"

Author: Added defaults for the fields within the Disk advanced drawers.

Reviewer 2: I would rather not confuse the users what recommended means. We are showing recommended in Disk modal because we have the value from the underlying template. AFAIK there is no such value specified for networks in the templates

Network field does not require description for each option since these options are created and managed by the user.

![Create VM - Networking -Model](img/2-3.jpg)
'Model' dropdown options

![Create VM - Networking -Binding](img/2-4.jpg)
'Binding method' dropdown options (previously 'Type')

## Storage

> ![Create VM - Storage -list](img/3-0.jpg)

Reviewer: What if no disk has been added we say in the description text a blank disk has been added to ensure the VM is operational. Otherwise we don't say that.

Author: Because this is circumstantial, I rather say this text when we do create a default Disk, within the disk modal itself (see image 3-0-0). This is the same thing we did with the NIC created due to PXE boot option on the General step.

I did change the description in the Disk list to be:
"Manage virtual machine disks. Disks are backed by PVCs which can be seen in storage > persistent volume claims
At least one disk is required to make the virtual machine operational"
But now that I think about it we should not prevent the user from deleting the last disk, but just warn him in an empty state that at least one disk is required, and drop the last line from the description.

Reviewer: Let's pull someone like @jelkosz or @suomiy in for their opinion. I believe we've always forced at least one disk. 
I'm not sure what advantage we are giving the user if we allow them to delete it but then require them to add it back. 
I guess for most cases though we shouldn't see users who aren't aware of the storage they are setting for a VM. 
Is a blank disk really needed for real world examples or just to ensure when someone randomly creates a VM that they have a disk?

Reviewer 2: >"Manage virtual machine disks. Disks are backed by PVCs which can be seen in storage > persistent volume claims

That is true, but just for some of them. Some disks are backed by Secret, ConfigMap or by nothing (Container, CloudInit). Maybe we should also mention DVs when mentioning PVCs (also not applicable to all of them eg when you attach PVC). Also some PVCs will not be visible when you create for example the template, but some PVCs will be created when you create a template.

Stating a generic truth here can be pretty complicated.

>At least one disk is required to make the virtual machine operational"
But now that I think about it we should not prevent the user from deleting the last disk, but just warn him in an empty state that at least one disk is required, and drop the last line from the description.

Yes we should not allow deleting source rootdisk, but other than that I think it is best not to add other restrictions. These might not be much useful when creating for example templates. Maybe the user wants just PXE template and wants to be adding disks later when creating VMs.

Author: @suomiy This relates to the previous comment. Does it make sense to offer to create a disk from a container within the storage step? Is it really equivalent to a "disk" in virtualization?
I am trying to confirm or deny my assumption that a "Container disk" should be available only for select OS image source

Reviewer 2: Yes it makes sense. The container might include many things, not just bootable image.

But it is not equivalent  to a "disk" in traditional virtualization as it is not a persistent storage

Author: @suomiy So:
1. Uploading and OS image from a container does create a disk even though it does not create PVC
2. We do need to offer the option of creating a disk within the storage step, with uploading content form a container (creates PVC)
is that correct?

Reviewer 2: IMO uploading a container does not make sense. You should just use a relevant registry in your environment.

Container should be just an image string/

Uploading itself will take an image and create DV/PVC and upload it to that.

Author: Ok, I have removed the "Disks are backed by PVCs which can be seen in storage > persistent volume claims" description from the top of the storage step.

Removing the OS source image disk from the equation for a second: If we allow from the Storage step to create a disk (like container), that does not involve PVC then this description is not true anymore

Disks list.
In case no disk type OS image source selected in the General step, a default disk will be created in order to make the VM operational.

> ![Create VM - Storage -Default disk](img/3-0-0.jpg)

Reviewer: You can only delete this though if there is another disk right? So should we be more clear about that?

Author: This is a problem, cause now we have to say it to all the "last" disks.
How about we allow deleting the last disk but warn the user on an empty state that at least one must be created? Right now, except for the list description (which might be too far above) which I added, the user can't guess why she cannot delete it unless she edits it within a modal.

Reviewer: ya not against this but I think we need to pull in the technical side - see my above comment :)

Reviewer 2: We are not allowing delete action for the source disk currently. Is it useful to have such feature?

Reviewer: It always feels a bit strange to lock it and not tell the user why. I think they should have the ability but be informed what the consequences would be.

Reviewer 2: I suppose yes, the user should have a choice to do that. But it has to be sync with the boot source of the vm.

Author: So, we're making the default disk deletable, right?
Are we allowing to delete the disk containing the OS (defined in the OS step) as well?

Reviewer 2: I thought this was what we were discussing. In case the user deletes the OS disk, we should probably let the user know he has to select other source / disk. Also we should probably detect the source according to the next boot order automatically.

Anyway, removal should probably not disable the disk tab and the source should not be a hard required field in the general tab. Relevant BZ: https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1840958

Author: @suomiy @matthewcarleton 
Revisiting this convo after we agreed to add the "OS source" step.

Do we agree that:
1. Because the OS source disk has been created externally, and because some fields within it are locked, we should lock this disk and mention it is created on the "OS source" step?
2. Because we mention to the user that the VM needs at least one disk available (regardless of the OS source disk), can we allow the user to delete the default disk?
3. When the user chooses to delete the last disk, we can pop up a confirmation modal, mentioning (yellow?) that the user will need to create a new disk instead.

WDYT guys?

Reviewer 2: I suppose we could go this way, but what are we going to do about the validation of the OS source step?
When you delete the disk the step stops being valid. But the next steps will be filled already.

Reviewer: We shouldn't allow an action to undo a previous step. It should be locked IMO and then we determine how to teach the user what the need to do.

Author: We all agree then.
I'll allow the deletion of default disks, with a notification that at least one disk is needed.
The OS source disk, in the case created, is not. deletable.

Reviewer 2: When you change a boot order you can cause the validation to fail easily.

IMO we could do what we do in the VM Import wizard. We could allow everything and then show an error alert to highlight what validation was broken in OS image selection step. WDYT?

Editing the default disk will present an info box notification.

![Create VM - Storage -list](img/3-1.jpg)
The Add/Edit modal has been modified.
- Name
- Type changed to 'Disk content'. This will change the configuration below
- Advanced drawer added containing: 

>     - Inteface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Interface
```

    - Volume mode
    - Access mode (should be automatically selected and locked to the Storage class default)

>     - Make disk bootbale checkbox (new)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Make disk bootable checkbox (new)
```

Reviewer: can we also say boot order is available in the advanced settings

![Create VM - Storage -list](img/3-2.jpg)
Disk content dropdwon options.

## Advanced

 ![Create VM - Advanced -drawers](img/4-0.jpg)
The advanced step drops the sub-steps from the wizard navigation in favor for section drawers within the step body.
This is done to save users the trouble to go through stuff that does not concern or intimidate them.

## Review & create

 ![Create VM - Advanced -drawers](img/5-0.jpg)

> The name of this step has changed to correlate better with the 'Create and review action that is available along previous steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The name of this step has changed to correlate better with the 'Create and review action' that is available along previous steps.
```

---
parent: Virtualization
version: 4.x
---

# create VM dropdowns

This item will cover various updates to the VM creation wizard
- Adding descriptions to the dropdown fields (using this pattern https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-design-kit/issues/218)
- Renaming fields
- Reordering fields

![Create VM - General-default](img/1-0.jpg)
Landing on the General step, Default mode.
Section titles added, and fields reorgenized and renamed.
'General' section:
- 'Name'
- 'Description'

> 'Resources & configuration' section'

Author: @suomiy 
In this design, selecting the common template flow hadn't changed at all.
The user selects the OS first, then the "Configuration" (this was "workload profile", I'm not that sure if we should change it now to Configuration, how about "Workload type?"), then the Flavor.
As I understand from Tomas, We've put an effort to make sure that these selections will always result in one option, the selected common template. 
Technically, the user can change the order of selection, though I don't see it likely.

As I understand and see it, the common template is not really for the user, but for our back end. I'm not sure how "centos6-server-small template" can benefit the user unless this info helps him in other steps.

> 'Resources & configuration' section'

Reviewer 2: > @suomiy
> In this design, selecting the common template flow hadn't changed at all.

I see, can you please add the template field to the designs as well so we can see it altogether?

> The user selects the OS first, then the "Configuration" (this was "workload profile", I'm not that sure if we should change it now to Configuration, how about "Workload type?"), then the Flavor.
> As I understand from Tomas, We've put an effort to make sure that these selections will always result in one option, the selected common template.
> Technically, the user can change the order of selection, though I don't see it likely.

When everything works well then yes. But it is very useful when something goes wrong. For example you have multiple versions of templates on your system and are unsure which one is used.

Also when you select custom flavor - you might be unsure which flavor got actually selected. 

There are many subtleties where knowing which template get used might be useful 

> 
> As I understand and see it, the common template is not really for the user, but for our back end. I'm not sure how "centos6-server-small template" can benefit the user unless this info helps him in other steps.

It might help him to understand why he sees os/cpu/memory limitations.

> 'Resources & configuration' section'

Author: Adding the Common template field as mentioned on a similar comment thread above

- 'Operating system'
- 'Configuration' (previously Workload profile)
- 'Flavor (CPU and Memory)' (previously only 'flavor')
'Operating system image source' section
- 'Boot operating system via' (previously 'source')

## General step

![Create VM - General](img/1-1.jpg)

> Upon selecting an operating system, the configuration and Flavor (CPU and Memory) fields will be enabled and their defaults will be selected.

Author: @suomiy 
The design displayed here hadn't changed anything really from the current implementation:
- User sees the OS field first
- User can start by selecting any of the fields to filter the others (for example, Flavor)

In any case, the user needs to select all the fields to result in one common template.
Since this is a UI, some fields must come before others.

The flow you mention is a "broken" one since the users are frustrated that none of the OS options fit their needs. No matter what they select, it is a compromise made by an educated guess at best. If this is a common case where users have to improvise by selecting what OS they suspect will fit best, we need to address that, either by adding "Other OS" in the OS field (I know it's a problem), or changing the entire UI completely.
I can try to provide a solution if we do think this is a significant use case, but for now, I'm not trying to change anything in the current implementation, just reorder some fields (switch between flavor and WorkloadProfile/Configuration and renaming others.
If we agree we need to change this behavior, by UI or Back-end, then it should be covered in a different PR

> Upon selecting an operating system, the configuration and Flavor (CPU and Memory) fields will be enabled and their defaults will be selected.

Reviewer: +1 I think you are making a good point @suomiy but I'm reluctant to say we should make any assumptions that are based in user feedback. Does it makes sense to you to hold on this until we can some better research done?

> Upon selecting an operating system, the configuration and Flavor (CPU and Memory) fields will be enabled and their defaults will be selected.

Reviewer 2: > Does it makes sense to you to hold on this until we can some better research done?

> User can start by selecting any of the fields to filter the others (for example, Flavor)

If it can stay enabled like this, then it's okay. Unless we know adding these limitations would be  useful, we should be careful adding them there.

> Upon selecting an operating system, the configuration and Flavor (CPU and Memory) fields will be enabled and their defaults will be selected.

Reviewer 2: > In any case, the user needs to select all the fields to result in one common template.

Generally yes, but in case of custom flavor there might be for example 4 possible templates and we just pick one. This might have some unforseen consequences for the user

> Upon selecting an operating system, the configuration and Flavor (CPU and Memory) fields will be enabled and their defaults will be selected.

Author: I'm switching the Workload Type and Flavor fields to be always enabled.

>Generally yes, but in case of custom flavor there might be for example 4 possible templates and we just pick one. This might have some unforseen consequences for the user

So this generally means we have to have a Common Template field, as a safety net for back-end potential problems. I'll see how we can surface that in the UI

> Upon selecting an operating system, the configuration and Flavor (CPU and Memory) fields will be enabled and their defaults will be selected.

Author: Adding Common template

![Create VM - General - VM configuration](img/1-1-1.jpg)
VM Configuration options

> Server is the default

Author: Sounds good!

![Create VM - General - flavor](img/1-1-2.jpg)
Flavor options
Medium is the default

![Create VM - General](img/1-2-1.jpg)
'Boot operating system via' field options

![Create VM - General](img/1-2.jpg)

> Selecting an option from the 'Boot operating system via' field will expose below all the fields required to connect the VM to an OS image source.

Author: @suomiy 
The point of this effort is to avoid making the user complete the same task in different steps.
The user is facing a difficult task here, so by splitting it to two different screens will not remove complexity, only add to it.
This task must be done anyway, so it is better experienced to complete it at one go, while the user is in focus and flow.
The Review step should not change, all the NIC/Disk data will be displayed on the correlating Network/Storage steps, same as it is currently implemented.

> Selecting an option from the 'Boot operating system via' field will expose below all the fields required to connect the VM to an OS image source.

Author: @suomiy 
Sorry, I don't see any workaround.

I tried to use the same Disk/Nic modal only from the general step, the context was lost again since there is no CTA to actually "Select OS image" within the modal. So to make it work, we do have to make some customization like the name of the modal and blocking the "Blank" option form the Disk content field. Take a look (@matthewcarleton let me know what you think too): 
![1-1 copy A](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/48942365/84006183-f92e0800-a976-11ea-9da0-06e9ab1d3f8a.jpg)
![1-1 copy B](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/48942365/84006187-fc28f880-a976-11ea-8400-6ffecbe2cd65.jpg)
![1-1 copy C](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/48942365/84006189-fd5a2580-a976-11ea-9879-b491ab438762.jpg)

I also compared this design to the "Complete this step on the Network/Storage step". Pushing this entire process to the General step works better for the same reasons.

> Selecting an option from the 'Boot operating system via' field will expose below all the fields required to connect the VM to an OS image source.

Reviewer: it feels a bit strange to select New PVC here and then show a table where they need to click an action to get to a modal to interact with that modal. It would be ideal (if we are saying we need the modal to pop up) for the user to have that option from the dropdown. It feels a bit strange though I think to open a modal from a dropdown. 
One thing we are missing here too is the upload right? We should at the very least describe it as an available action otherwise we must assume the user doesn't know it is available to them.

> Selecting an option from the 'Boot operating system via' field will expose below all the fields required to connect the VM to an OS image source.

Reviewer 2: > The point of this effort is to avoid making the user complete the same task in different steps.
The user is facing a difficult task here, so by splitting it to two different screens will not remove complexity, only add to it.
This task must be done anyway, so it is better experienced to complete it at one go, while the user is in focus and flow.

IMO it seemed to help the VM Import flow quite a bit - moving the provider stuff into its own tab.
There might be too much happening on one page and maybe it would make more sense to focus on one task instead (picking OS image).

I guess we will never know, until we get some feedback on this from users.

> I tried to use the same Disk/Nic modal only from the general step, the context was lost again since there is no CTA to actually "Select OS image" within the modal. So to make it work, we do have to make some customization like the name of the modal and blocking the "Blank" option form the Disk content field. 

It should be quite feasible to customize the modal for the OS source selection.

> it feels a bit strange to select New PVC here and then show a table where they need to click an action to get to a modal to interact with that modal. It would be ideal (if we are saying we need the modal to pop up) for the user to have that option from the dropdown. It feels a bit strange though I think to open a modal from a dropdown.

I agree, it is probably unnecessary to show the whole table for just one entity.

>One thing we are missing here too is the upload right? We should at the very least describe it as an available action otherwise we must assume the user doesn't know it is available to them.

It should be possible to change the source in the modal to upload as well. Although not sure on how will @glekner end up implementing it and how it will impact the whole wizard flow

> Selecting an option from the 'Boot operating system via' field will expose below all the fields required to connect the VM to an OS image source.

Author: > it feels a bit strange to select New PVC here and then show a table where they need to click an action to get to a modal to interact with that modal.

Agree

> It would be ideal (if we are saying we need the modal to pop up) for the user to have that option from the dropdown. It feels a bit strange though I think to open a modal from a dropdown.
One thing we are missing here too is the upload, right? We should at the very least describe it as an available action otherwise we must assume the user doesn't know it is available to them.
> It should be quite feasible to customize the modal for the OS source selection.
This supports the original design suggestion. Anyway, the design I added in this comment is not working (showing list within the general step and all). The CTA to create a new disk with a button fees funny to me, it is out of sync with the page flow. Here's another implementation, but I still think in-page is better:
![1-1 copy Upload local file Copy](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/48942365/84130476-01a44280-aa4c-11ea-891a-13031d164919.jpg)

I think that all of this supports that it would be easier to surface all the required fields in-page/line without the need to customize any modal.

> IMO it seemed to help the VM Import flow quite a bit - moving the provider stuff into its own tab.

I think it makes sense to add the OS image as a new step.

@suomiy 
I admit that I don't see the issue with the in-page/line solution. It is already implemented today.
Today, when the user selects PXE, URL, and Container options, we already follow-up with the required fields in-page/line below the OS image field. So why not align this existing behavior to include other options available from the OS image as well? Why break "Existing PVC/ Clone an existing PVC/New PVC (upload) from this flow?

> Selecting an option from the 'Boot operating system via' field will expose below all the fields required to connect the VM to an OS image source.

Reviewer 2: > I think that all of this supports that it would be easier to surface all the required fields in-page/line without the need to customize any modal.

It is quite easy to customize the modal. But adding a subset of inline fields to the page will make it quite a pain. Disparity of functionality/validations  + two places for maintanance/bugs

> I think it makes sense to add the OS image as a new step.

+1, this sounds good as it doesn't have the problems mentioned above (the inlining part). We could reuse full feature disk modal with few changes in the step variant.

> Today, when the user selects PXE, URL, and Container options, we already follow-up with the required fields in-page/line below the OS image field. So why not align this existing behavior to include other options available from the OS image as well?

As I mentioned - the features/validations. We are not even enforcing the required part today.

> Why break "Existing PVC/ Clone an existing PVC/New PVC (upload) from this flow?

Because, there are many fields/validations which are relevant for the user

Anyway we should take boot order and disk removal into considerations as well. These will change the source outside of this flow.

> Selecting an option from the 'Boot operating system via' field will expose below all the fields required to connect the VM to an OS image source.

Reviewer 2: Also the current iteration with Add disk button which will opens the disk dialog looks quite fine.

> Selecting an option from the 'Boot operating system via' field will expose below all the fields required to connect the VM to an OS image source.

Author: I've updated the PR to include the design we all found favorite (creating a new "OS source" step)

For example: on selecting the 'Existing PVC' option, additional fields will appear below, required to select a PVC available on the cluster.
The disk name should be added here as well to establish a better link between this step and the Storage step.
An info alert will notify the user that a disk will be added to to the disks list on the Storage step.

![Create VM - OS disk on list](img/1-3.jpg)
Within the storage step, the disk added on the general step will appear as the first item on the list.
This disk cannot be deleted but can be modified.

![Create VM - OS disk modal](img/1-3-1.jpg)
Editing that disk will display a warning notification within the edit modal.

## Netwroking step

> ![Create VM - Networking -list](img/2-0.jpg)

Author: You are right, I'll remove this "need at least one NIC" thing.

This also sync to my suggestion above, when the user wants to delete the default NIC, we can pop up a deletion confirmation box mentioning what is this NIC for, make sure the user is aware.

@matthewcarleton 
WDYT? can we add it?

> ![Create VM - Networking -list](img/2-0.jpg)

Reviewer: I think we should avoid "NIC". We don't explain that anywhere so let's not assume a user understands that. 
+1 to informing them about removing the default NIC.

> ![Create VM - Networking -list](img/2-0.jpg)

Author: +1 changing terminology from NIC to a network interface
Adding deletion confirmation modals to default NIC/disk

NIC list.
For any VM source selection (with the exception of PXE) a default NIC will be added.
This NIC exposes the VM to the cluster.

![Create VM - Networking -Default](img/2-1.jpg)
On editing this default NIC, an info alert will remind the user that modifying this NIC might break that 'exposing to cluster' configuration.

![Create VM - Networking -Add](img/2-2.jpg)
Add NIC modal.
The Advanced drawer is closed by default, as seen in the previous image.
All fields have moved into the advanced drawer, except the Name and Network fields.
Network field does not require description for each option since these options are created and managed by the user.

![Create VM - Networking -Model](img/2-3.jpg)
'Model' dropdown options.
ViritIO marked as (recommended)

> ![Create VM - Networking -Binding](img/2-4.jpg)

Reviewer: @fabiand I know this is something we talked about. WDYT?

> ![Create VM - Networking -Binding](img/2-4.jpg)

Author: Pasting @fabiands comment from the doc:
> Advanced - Because we have informations about what to set the default to (taken from the template)

> ![Create VM - Networking -Binding](img/2-4.jpg)

Reviewer 2: We do not have an information about this AFAIK

'Binding method' dropdown options (previously 'Type')

## Storage

![Create VM - Storage -list](img/3-0.jpg)
Disks list.
In case no disk type OS image source selected in the General step, a default disk will be created in order to make the VM operational.

![Create VM - Storage -Default disk](img/3-0-0.jpg)
Editing the default disk will present an info box notification.

![Create VM - Storage -list](img/3-1.jpg)
The Add/Edit modal has been modified.
- Name
- Type changed to 'Disk content'. This will change the configuration below
- Advanced drawer added containing: 

>     - Interface

Reviewer 2: IMO it is better to keep the Interface visibile since the value can vary according to the selected template and the user might be suprised what value was chosen by the UI. There is a quite complex logic which decides what the value will be according to the template

Author: Including @fabiand response from the doc:
> Because we have informations about what to set the default to (taken from the template)

Reviewer 2: as I mentioned
- the user doesn't know what template was selected
- there might not be the right template for the user's use case
- the value can differ according to cdrom/disk and allowed/recommended buses

    - Volume mode
    - Access mode (should be automatically selected and locked to the Storage class default)
    - Make disk bootable checkbox (new)

![Create VM - Storage -list](img/3-2.jpg)
Disk content dropdwon options.

## Advanced

 ![Create VM - Advanced -drawers](img/4-0.jpg)

> The advanced step drops the sub-steps from the wizard navigation in favor for section drawers within the step body.

Reviewer 2: This will give a quite headache for users which want to customize it. 

- you have to click multiple times to explore all the options
- the page will get very long once you do that.
- there will be double scrolling for the Cloud Init editor
- the Cloud Init editor might get more complicated in the future and it might overwhelm the users
- the boot order might get used quite often by the users

Could we solve the original problem by adding an `Skip Advanced` button to the wizard footer to be more explicit ? We could assign this to a primary button and the `Next` would be secondary.

thoughts? 

Nevertheless the users already have an option of choosing `Review and create` option .

Reviewer: That's a good point @suomiy 
I know we've done some investigation around advanced in the past [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zGYFLJ3PVa-q4smMIiXH8tolLdUq8A5vn5Ybf9OhF6g/edit#heading=h.36pfaes06mcj)
@Ranelim it might be a good idea to pull this from this design and have a separate effort to explore this.

Author: The problem of having to go through all the sub-steps is quite the opposite of what an "Advanced" step should do. We want to avoid exhausting the user. Adding a "Review and Create" link button is not in the main flow and it will not solve the fact that we make the user go through literally everything.
Plus, the points mentioned above are actually similar or even identical to the same issues we get with the sub-steps. 

> it might be a good idea to pull this from this design and have a separate effort to explore this.
Sure thing

---
parent: Virtualization
version: 4.x
---

# create VM dropdowns

This item will cover various updates to the VM creation wizard
- Adding descriptions to the dropdown fields (using this pattern https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-design-kit/issues/218)
- Renaming fields
- Reordering fields
- Adding 'Operating System source' step

![Create VM - General-default](img/1-0.jpg)
Landing on the General step, Default mode.
Section titles added, and fields reorgenized and renamed.
Any OS image source related fields are mofed to the next step.

'General' section:
- 'Name'
- 'Description'
'Resources & configuration' section'
- 'Operating system'
- 'Workload type' (previously Workload profile)
- 'Flavor (CPU and Memory)' (previously only 'flavor')

## General step

![Create VM - General](img/1-1.jpg)

> Upon selecting an operating system, the Workload type and Flavor (CPU and Memory) fields will be enabled and their defaults will be selected.

Author: Yes, I have removed the Disabled behaviour

![Create VM - General - Workload type](img/1-1-1.jpg)
Workload type options
Server is the default

![Create VM - General - flavor](img/1-1-2.jpg)
Flavor options.
Medium is the default

## Operating system source step (new)

![Create VM - General](img/1-2.jpg)
Operating system source step,landing mode.

![Create VM - General](img/1-2-1.jpg)
'Boot operating system via' field options

![Create VM - General](img/1-2-2.jpg)
Selecting an option from the 'Boot operating system via' field will expose below all the fields required to upload the image and create the correlating disk/NIC.
For example: on selecting the 'URL' option, additional fields will appear below.
These fieldss are required in order to point to the desired URL asl well as creating a disk via PVC that will containt the image on that URL.

> The fields are basically mapped 1:1 to the Disk modal, with the URL option selected for 'Disk content' field.

Author: Changed the images to display the same field name and order.
Please note that the fields order and names did change within the Disk/NIC modal and this image now reflects that.
Also, because the "Boot operating system via*" field is equivalent to "Disk content, but not the same (PXE is available too) I offer that the following fields will be identical to the ones appear in the disk modal, only that the Disk Content is hidden.

> The fields are basically mapped 1:1 to the Disk modal, with the URL option selected for 'Disk content' field.

Reviewer 2: ok, we could distinguish the "Boot operating system via*" since it will not be part of the modal component anyway. And is the only part which is different. And we will hide the Disk content (source) in the disk modal

An Advanced (settings) drawer is available here as well, containing the same options as the Advanced options on the disk modal.

![Create VM - OS disk on list](img/1-3.jpg)
Once the user clicks next, the disk containing the OS image from the URL is added. This disk will be available on the Storage step and will appear as the first item on the list.

> This disk cannot be deleted bu can be modified to some extent.

Reviewer 2: although now I worry, we might have forgotten about one case. 

What happens when the user selects a template, but wants to use a different disk in that template? We probably should allow boot order change of all disks in boot order modal. 

We still could lock the selected (boot order 1) disk against deletion. And requite the boot order modal to have at least one present.

> This disk cannot be deleted bu can be modified to some extent.

Author: @suomiy 
> What happens when the user selects a template, but wants to use a different disk in that template? We probably should allow boot order change of all disks in boot order modal.

Which template, the common template?

Can this issue be pushed to the boot order section, in the Advanced step (does not exist yet), and remove the "boot order " field from Storage/Networking steps now?

> This disk cannot be deleted bu can be modified to some extent.

Reviewer 2: > @suomiy
> 
> > What happens when the user selects a template, but wants to use a different disk in that template? We probably should allow boot order change of all disks in boot order modal.
> 
> Which template, the common template?

normal tempate

> 
> Can this issue be pushed to the boot order section, in the Advanced step (does not exist yet), and remove the "boot order " field from Storage/Networking steps now?

yes

> This disk cannot be deleted bu can be modified to some extent.

Author: Cool, removing the "Disk/NIC boot" field :)

![Create VM - OS disk modal](img/1-3-1.jpg)
Editing that disk will display an info notification within the edit modal, mentioning the link between this disk and the one created omn the OS source step.

> The fields related to the OS source, in this case, the URL, will be locked.

Reviewer 2: I think we can allow editing even the URL. The source (Disk content) should still be locked

Author: I'm not sure, hear me out:
If we allow editing the URL from the storage step, why not allow us to edit the Disk content as well?
The point of locking these fields was to keep the integrity of the OS source configuration on the previous step. If we can change the URL, we might as well "break" the link to the OS image.

If we choose to enable all the fields from the Storage step, then isn't it weird we are blocking that disk deletion but allow to change it unrecognizable?

Reviewer 2: ok, I guess it makes sense. Although this changes with the boot order where you can still swap it to unrecognizable image.

## Netwroking step

![Create VM - Networking -list](img/2-0.jpg)
NIC list.
For any VM source selection (with the exception of PXE) a default NIC will be added.
This NIC exposes the VM to the cluster.

> ![Create VM - Networking -Default](img/2-1.jpg)

Reviewer 2: Most user's will probably not get that far. Does it make sense to show this in the list as well?

Author: @beanh66 
Do you know if we can place a notification within a list item, in-line (like in the image below)? 
![2-0 copy](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/48942365/84870850-7ac51a80-b088-11ea-968b-56bd191aa5d9.jpg)

Reviewer 2: not sure if this is an easy thing to do. Anyway I just meant anywhere in the Networking page

Reviewer: ya I think this could appear above the name and table and reference the NIC name

Author: Placing the notification in-page above the list and removing it from the modal.
Also, adding the same notification text in the deletion confirmation modal

---
parent: Virtualization
version: 4.x
---

# create VM dropdowns

This item will cover various updates to the VM creation wizard
- Adding descriptions to the dropdown fields (using this pattern https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-design-kit/issues/218)
- Renaming fields
- Reordering fields
- Adding 'Operating System source' step

> ![Create VM - General-default](img/1-0.jpg)

Reviewer 2: does it make sense to have the common template selectable? IMO, it could be enough to just show the resolved common template in the review

Author: Based on our discussion in a previous comment thread, I thought we needed to provide a way to directly select common templates for cases there will be more than one option available (edge case, but still needed to be solved).

If this is not the case, I'll be happy to:
a. Just hide the common templates altogether
b. Just to mention what is the selected common template based on the previous selections

WDYT?

Reviewer: Where does exposing the Common template come from? AFAIK we don't want to get into these details. It's more confusing IMO. If we are showing it at all we need to teach the user what they are - they won't know anything about them at this point right?

Author: Adding @jelkosz comment:
> Common template is not something I would tell the user about
we should just pick the most recent one (in case there are more than one common templates available after selecting all the fields above)
it is the concept which keeps confusing everyone who learns about the fact they exist

Removing the Common templates from the UI

Reviewer 2: The user doesn't have to care about them if they see one line mentioning this in the review.

If you want our users to think our wizard runs on magic, then sure hide them.

---
parent: Virtualization
version: 4.x
---

> # create VM dropdowns

Reviewer: This title should be updated now b/c this update covers more than just the drop downs

This item will cover various updates to the VM creation wizard
- Adding descriptions to the dropdown fields (using this pattern https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-design-kit/issues/218)
- Renaming fields
- Reordering fields
- Adding 'Operating System source' step

![Create VM - General-default](img/1-0.jpg)
Landing on the General step, Default mode.
Section titles added, and fields reorgenized and renamed.

> Any OS image source related fields are mofed to the next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any OS image source related fields are moved to the next step.
```

'General' section:
- 'Name'
- 'Description'
'Resources & configuration' section'
- 'Operating system'
- 'Workload type' (previously Workload profile)
- 'Flavor (CPU and Memory)' (previously only 'flavor')

## General step

> ![Create VM - General](img/1-1.jpg)

Reviewer: nit - in the flavor dropdown value it has `2 CPC, 16 Bip`

Reviewer: Still seeing `Bip` for memory :(

Author: The Zombie BIP. I've updated 1-1 and 1-1-2 jpgs.

Upon selecting an operating system, the Workload type and Flavor (CPU and Memory) fields will be enabled and their defaults will be selected.

![Create VM - General - Workload type](img/1-1-1.jpg)
Workload type options
Server is the default

![Create VM - General - flavor](img/1-1-2.jpg)
Flavor options.
Medium is the default

## Operating system source step (new)

![Create VM - General](img/1-2.jpg)
Operating system source step,landing mode.

![Create VM - General](img/1-2-1.jpg)
'Boot operating system via' field options

![Create VM - General](img/1-2-2.jpg)
Selecting an option from the 'Boot operating system via' field will expose below all the fields required to upload the image and create the correlating disk/NIC.
For example: on selecting the 'URL' option, additional fields will appear below.

> These fieldss are required in order to point to the desired URL asl well as creating a disk via PVC that will containt the image on that URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These fields are required in order to point to the desired URL as well as creating a disk via PVC that will contain the image on that URL.
```

The fields are basically mapped 1:1 to the Disk modal, with the URL option selected for 'Disk content' field.

An Advanced (settings) drawer is available here as well, containing the same options as the Advanced options on the disk modal.

> ![Create VM - OS disk on list](img/1-3.jpg)

Reviewer: two little nits on the alert
Could we just say: "Rootdisk" contains the operating system image set on the operating system source"
These alerts should be info alerts right? I think the bell alert is reserved for very generic content, this feels more like info to me.

Once the user clicks next, the disk containing the OS image from the URL is added. This disk will be available on the Storage step and will appear as the first item on the list.
This disk cannot be deleted but can be modified to some extent.

> ![Create VM - OS disk modal](img/1-3-1.jpg)

Reviewer: can we update the text to show the "operating system source" instead of the general step text.

Author: Within the image, right?

> Editing that disk will display an info notification within the edit modal, mentioning the link between this disk and the one created omn the OS source step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Editing that disk will display an info notification within the edit modal, mentioning the link between this disk and the one created on the OS source step.
```

The fields related to the OS source, in this case, the URL, will be locked.

## Netwroking step

![Create VM - Networking -list](img/2-0.jpg)
NIC list.
For any VM source selection (with the exception of PXE) a default NIC will be added.
This NIC exposes the VM to the cluster.
an info alert will notify the user of the purpose of this NIC and that modifying this NIC might break that 'exposing to cluster' configuration.

> ![Create VM - Networking -list](img/2-5.jpg)

Reviewer: "Do you want to delete this network interface anyway" text could be shortened to 
```
Are you sure you want to delete this?

On deleting the default NIC, a confirmation modal will present itsself.

![Create VM - Networking -Default](img/2-1.jpg)
Edit modal.
The Advanced drawer is always collapsed by default

![Create VM - Networking -Add](img/2-2.jpg
The Add NIC modal.
The Advanced drawer is closed by default, as seen in the previous image.
All fields have moved into the advanced drawer, except the Name and Network fields.
Network field does not require description for each option since these options are created and managed by the user.

![Create VM - Networking -Model](img/2-3.jpg)
'Model' dropdown options.
ViritIO marked as (recommended)

![Create VM - Networking -Binding](img/2-4.jpg)
'Binding method' dropdown options (previously 'Type')

This field's default is dependent on the Network field.
For 'Pod network' the default option will be 'Masquerade'.
For other Network option, the default will be 'Birgde'.

## Storage

![Create VM - Storage -list](img/3-0.jpg)
Disks list.
In case no disk type OS image source selected in the General step, a default disk will be created in order to make the VM operational.
This will be highlighted by an in-line info alert (like in the Networking step)

> ![Create VM - Storage -Defaul disk deletion](img/3-4.jpg)

Reviewer: Same comment about the confirmation text as above

On deleting the default disk, a confirmation modal will present itsself.

![Create VM - Storage -Default disk](img/3-0-0.jpg)

Add disk modal.
- 'Type' field changed to 'Disk content'
- 'Name' field changed to 'Disk name'
- 'Size' changed to 'Disk size (PVC size)'
- Some fields pulled into the the Advanced drawer (see image below)

![Create VM - Storage -list](img/3-1.jpg)
The Add/Edit modal expanded view.
- Advanced drawer added containing: 
    - Interface
    - Volume mode
    - Access mode (should be automatically selected and locked to the Storage class default)
    - Make disk bootable checkbox (new)

![Create VM - Storage -list](img/3-2.jpg)
Disk content dropdwon options.

![Create VM - Storage -list empty state](img/3-3.jpg)
List empty state will notify the user that at least one disk is needed.

> This will be supported by an alert blocking the user from moving from this step when there are no disks.

Reviewer: Can we add a design for this alert so it doesn't get missed in development

## Review & create

>  ![Create VM - Advanced -drawers](img/5-0.jpg)

Reviewer: I've been talking to @jelkosz about the "create a new template from this configuration" 
He made a good point about not really needing this. The user is now very easily able to create a template and it's not likely a common task where a user would take this path to create a template. It also adds complexity to the creation flow. We'd have to think about how they name that template and also how we surface that template being created. Add a checkbox here requires a lot :) 
I think removing it for now and stepping back to determine it's worth is the right step for this PR. WDYT?

Reviewer 3: Makes sense to me. Especially happen about the reduction in complexity :)

Author: Not sure if this checkbox adds complexity. This is my take
**Small cognitive load:**
1. It has a very small footprint, short straightforward text wrapped in a checkbox
2. It is placed on a page where no action is required
3. It is not mandatory
4. Unless it is a backend complexity, the complexity that comes with this option is a "Template name" field, which can be autocompleted by the VM name itself (+"template")

**Value:**
1. I think this option does cover a scenario appealing to users: "Create a VM AND a template on the same run".
2. I also think it is not that unlikely that users might want to use this action as an afterthought after completing the Create VM wizard.

Having said that, I don't feel strongly about keeping it or removing it.

Reviewer: > Not sure if this checkbox adds complexity. This is my take:
> 
> **Small cognitive load:**
> 
> 1. It has a very small footprint, short straightforward text wrapped in a checkbox
> 2. It is placed on a page where no action is required
> 3. It is not mandatory
> 4. Unless it is a backend complexity, the complexity that comes with this option is a "Template name" field, which can be autocompleted by the VM name itself (+"template")
> 

ya I don't disagree - I'm not saying we shouldn't consider it but I do think pulling it from these designs make sense until we determine it's something that will get implemented.

> **Value:**
> 
> 1. I think this option does cover a scenario appealing to users: "Create a VM AND a template on the same run".

This is interesting - it makes we wonder actually if it makes more sense to add the ability to create a VM from a template when you create the template. Basically the opposite of what we have in these designs.

> 2. I also think it is not that unlikely that users might want to use this action as an afterthought after completing the Create VM wizard.
> 
> Having said that, I don't feel strongly about keeping it or removing it.

Reviewer 3: > This is interesting - it makes we wonder actually if it makes more sense to add the ability to create a VM from a template when you create the template. Basically the opposite of what we have in these designs.

It's just one of those things where I don't think a user would go to VM Templates expecting to create a VM.

Author: > It's just one of those things where I don't think a user would go to VM Templates expecting to create a VM.

I agree. I'll drop the "Create template" option for now as it becomes an independent item, but we should pursue it in the near future

Reviewer: ya I really think the only way of validating any of this is from user research. It's certainly not a feature that is required for CNV but could prove in some way to be a "nice to have" that we could possibly consider.

Add disk modal.
- 'Type' field changed to 'Disk content'
- 'Name' field changed to 'Disk name'
- 'Size' changed to 'Disk size (PVC size)'
- Some fields pulled into the the Advanced drawer (see image below)

![Create VM - Storage -list](img/3-1.jpg)
The Add/Edit modal expanded view.
- Advanced drawer added containing:
    - Interface
    - Volume mode
    - Access mode (should be automatically selected and locked to the Storage class default)
    - Make disk bootable checkbox (new)

![Create VM - Storage -list](img/3-2.jpg)
Disk content dropdwon options.

![Create VM - Storage -list empty state](img/3-3.jpg)
List empty state will notify the user that at least one disk is needed.

![Create VM - Storage -list empty state](img/3-5.jpg)
This will be supported by an alert blocking the user from moving from this step when there are no disks.

## Review & create

 ![Create VM - Advanced -drawers](img/5-0.jpg)
The name of this step has changed to correlate better with the 'Create and review action' that is available along previous steps.

The 'Start VM on creation' checkbox had been removed from the General step and placed in this step at the bottom of the page.

> The 'Create template from this VM' checkbox had been removed completely from the wizard for now.

Reviewer: I don't think we need this line at all b/c it never was added in the UI.
